docs: first draft for the DID ADR (#175)
allinbits/cosmos-cash: docs/Explanation/ADR/adr-004-did.md

> {decision body}

The DID W3C specification are designed using the "open world assumption" approach for data modelling. 
For the cosmos-cash implementation we will be following the did-core specification: custom properties will require a fork and a different implementation of the cosmos-cash did module.

### Method schema

The schema for the cosmos-cash DID implementation is the following

`did`:`cash`:`{CHAIN_NAME}`:`{ACCOUNT_ADDRESS (without chain prefix)}`

i.e. `did:cash:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj`

where the `CHAIN_NAME` is used by a resolver as routing and the `ACCOUNT_ADDRESS` as the unique identifier for the DID

> TODO: this is a placeholder, a decision must be taken in this regards, the method name could be more generically indicate the module like i.e. `tendermint`

### DID Document

The DID document will support the following attributes:

- `context` - for json-ld specification
- `id` - indicating the DID of the document
- `controller` - a list of DID controllers for the DID document
- `verificationMethods` - a list of verification method objects

> - `services` - a list of services

Reviewer: **suggestion:** an example of a DID may be useful
**suggestion:** links to the terminology in the W3C specs would be beneficial as well.

We will support the following verification relationships:

- `authentication`
- `assertionMethod`
- `keyExchange`
- `invocationMethod`
- `delegationMethod`

##### [DID Operations](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#method-operations)

###### Create

The publication on chain of a DID document is allowed only when the submitted DID document contains at least one verification method that is listed in the verification relationship `authentication` and whose `blockchainAccountID` matches the transaction signer for the address part (ignoring the chain prefix).

###### Resolve/Verify

The integrity of the DID documents stored on the ledger are guaranteed by the underlying blockchain protocol. 

> TODO: anything to add about resolution? see [169#issuecomment-891189527](https://github.com/allinbits/cosmos-cash/issues/169#issuecomment-891189527)

###### Update

Amends to a DID document are allowed only to:

- controllers of one of the verification method listed in the `authentication` verification relationship

> - controllers of one of the verification method listed in the `authentication` verification relationship of the DID document identified in the the controller of the current DID document 

Reviewer: **issue(blocking):** this needs more explanation and clarity. 1. it should be explicit about attributes that can be updated and 2. the current text needs to be clearer that this is describing who can make updates.

    "controller": [
        "did:cash:abc:2222"              <--- Controller for the document describing did:cash:abc:1111 
    ]
    "verificationMethods" : [
        "id": "did:cash:abc:1111#key-1",
        "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1VerificationKey2019",
        "controller": "did:cash:abc:1111",   <--- Controller for the verification method identified by did:cash:abc:1111#key-1
        "blockchainAccountID": "cosmos1g4fdrtxjjvzxvazkmj7zgz634a4hn93nry0p9u"
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "id": "did:cash:abc:1111#key-1"      <--- Authentication relationships for key did:cash:abc:1111#key-1
    ]
}

and did:cash:abc:2222

{
    "@context": ...
    "id": "did:cash:abc:2222",         <--- DID subject 
    "verificationMethods" : [
        "id": "did:cash:abc:2222#key-1",
        "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1VerificationKey2019",
        "controller": "did:cash:abc:2222", <--- Controller for the verification method identified by did:cash:abc:1111#key-1
        "blockchainAccountID": "cosmos1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "id": "did:cash:abc:2222#key-1"    <--- Authentication relationships for key did:cash:abc:2222#key-1
    ] 
}

> according to the rules the DID did:cash:abc:2222 is authorized to amend the DID document for did:cash:abc:1111  

Reviewer: **praise:** The example is good, but I would move the explanatory text from below the example to introducing the example.

```

The transaction signer address MUST match the verification method `blockchainAccountID` for the address part (ignoring the chain prefix).

> XXX: the consequences of that is that a controller has the same powers of the creator of the did document

###### Deactivate

The deactivation of a DID is obtained by removing all the values for the properties:

- `controller`
- `verificationMethods` 

> the deactivation is allowed following the same rules af for the [update operation](#update) 

Reviewer: **thought:** should this scope what `deactivation` means in this context?

> 

#### Metadata

##### [DID Document Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-document-metadata)

The implementation for metadata MUST report the following properties for a DID document

- `created`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the creation date, that is the utc date associated to the block height when the DID document was submitted the first time
- `deactivated`: whenever the DID document is [deactivated](#Deactivate) 

> - `versionId`: for the version id we use the hash of the transaction that created/updated the DID

Reviewer: **nitpick:** these should indicate data types for these fields given that `created` gave a type

##### [DID Resolution Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-resolution-metadata)

> This part of the W3C DID specification is not covered by this ADR

Reviewer: **question**: Why is this not covered by this ADR?

#### [DID URL Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-url-syntax)

> No `paths` or `fragments` are defined for this DID method. 

Reviewer: **suggestion:** this should explain any consequences of this and why

    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:cosmos:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#key-1"
    ],
    "services": [
        {
            "id":"agent:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
			"type":"DIDCommMessaging",
			"serviceEndpoint":"https://agent.xyz/ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
        }
    ]
}
```

### DID Method name

The namestring that shall identify this DID method is: `cosmos`.

A DID that uses this method MUST begin with the following prefix: `did:cosmos`. Per this [DID specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core), this string MUST be in lowercase. The remainder of the DID, after the prefix, is specified below.

#### Method Specific Identifier

The namespace specific identifier is defined by the following ABNF:

```
cosmos-did                = "did:cosmos:" cosmos-specific-id-string
cosmos-specific-id-string = cosmos-chain-name ":" unique-identifier
cosmos-chain-name         = 1*255id-char
unique-identifier         = 38*256id-char
id-char                   = ALPHA / DIGIT / (ALPHA "-") / (DIGIT "-")
```

For the `unique-identifier` it is RECOMMENDED to use a cosmos account address (without chain prefix and separator) or a UUID 

> Examples using a cosmos address: 

Reviewer 2: I would put an example from the derived address, so it can better be understood how it looks from the cosmos address to the did Id.

A state of the art implementation includes

- A public financial infrastructure (public goods) 
- Auditing and identification of bad actors (AML regulations)
- A strictly privacy respecting approach (GDPR)

An approach to tackle the identity and privacy challenge that has been gaining momentum in the recent years is the SSI approach, that, coupled with DLT technology, has been capturing the attention of both the private and public sector. 

The Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) relays on two building blocks: decentralized identifiers (DIDs) and verifiable credentials (VC). This ADR is about describing the DID implementation in a cosmos-sdk based blockchain.

The goal of this ADR is to define a foundation for the necessary components to realize the Cosmos Cash objectives and on the same time to keep the implementation of the DID fully compliant with the W3C specifications. **Successive iterations will address API ergonomics and standard compatibility issues.** 

## Decision

The DID W3C specification are designed using the "open world assumption" approach for data modelling. 

> For the Cosmos Cash implementation we will be following the did-core specification: custom properties will require a fork and a different implementation of the cosmos-cash did module.

Author: good point, the fork in this case would be of the module, not of the specs. Makes me think that this whole sentence doesn't make much sense. I'll repharase it.

> The following is an example of a DID Document:

Author: I'll remove the example since I'll make more contextualized examples later

        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
    "verificationMethods" : [
        {
            "id": "did:cosmos:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#key-1",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:cosmos:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cosmos1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:cosmos:cosmos:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#key-1"
    ],
    "services": [
        {
            "id":"agent:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "type":"DIDCommMessaging",
            "serviceEndpoint":"https://agent.xyz/ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
        }
    ]
}
```

### DID Method name

The namestring that shall identify this DID method is: `cosmos`.

A DID that uses this method MUST begin with the following prefix: `did:cosmos`. Per this [DID specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core), this string MUST be in lowercase. The remainder of the DID, after the prefix, is specified below.

#### Method Specific Identifier

> The namespace specific identifier is defined by the following ABNF:

Author: I am not sure here, the acronym is commonly used for DID method specifications. I prefer to leave as it is

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```ABNF
```

cosmos-did                = "did:cosmos:" cosmos-specific-id-string
cosmos-specific-id-string = cosmos-chain-name ":" unique-identifier
cosmos-chain-name         = 1*255id-char
unique-identifier         = 38*256id-char
id-char                   = ALPHA / DIGIT / (ALPHA "-") / (DIGIT "-")
```

> For the `unique-identifier` it is RECOMMENDED to use a cosmos account address (without chain prefix and separator) or an UUID 

Author: at this point we are not sure about this, we recommend to use a uuid, but a use can use whatever they like

Examples using a cosmos address: 

- `did:cosmos:cash:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj`  from address `cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj`
- `did:cosmos:cosmoshub:ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj`  from address `cosmos1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj`

Examples using an UUID:

- `did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb`
  

##### [DID Operations](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#method-operations)

DID and associated DID documents are managed by a cosmos-sdk module using gRPC as communication protocol. In this section the CRUD operations for a cosmos DID are defined.
###### Create

> To create and publish a DID document use the message 

Author: Cosmos

```
MsgCreateDidDocument(id string, signerAccount string)
```

The parameter for the message are the DID to be created and the key that will be used as the initial verification method in the authentication relationship in the DID document. 

If the input did is not a valid did for the cosmos method or the DID already exists on chain, the message will return an error. 

> Example message and resulting DID Document on a Cosmos Cash chain:

Author: Cosmos DID

```javascript
/* gRPC message */
MsgCreateDidDocument(
    "806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb", 
    "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
)

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "verificationMethods" : [
        {
            "id": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
    ]
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z", 
  "versionId": "ae11692325525e82337167fcfab34d45d1904ff786e2d4bf4be2d1c4878cd34c" /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */
}

```

The [`did:key`](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-method-key/) method is supported by the module and resolves automatically blockchain addresses. 

> It is RECOMMENDED to use an id that is not equals to the blockchain account address for privacy concerns and to isolate the verification methods to the did subject (for example during key rotation)

Author: I'll rephrase this in a following commit

> NOTE: a more fine grained way of creating a DID MAY be implemented with a `MsgCreateDidDocumentWitOptions` with the goal of saving in gas by executing a single transactions in a complex DID scenario.

###### Resolve/Verify

The integrity of the DID documents stored on the ledger are guaranteed by the underlying blockchain protocol. 

> A DID MAY be resolved using the gRPC message:

Reviewer 3: let's not use slashes to separate alternatives, per https://developers.google.com/style/slashes?hl=en

> A DID MAY be resolved using the gRPC message:

Reviewer 3: oh, why are we capitalizing MAY here? do we can "can" ? 

> In general, reserve for official policy or legal considerations. To convey possibility, use can or might instead. To convey permission, use can instead.

per https://developers.google.com/style/word-list?hl=en#letter-m

> A DID MAY be resolved using the gRPC message:

Author: yes we can, I think we need to update also the "how to write a ADR" about the MAY one

```
QueryDidDocumentRequest(did string)
```

Example
```javascript
/* gRPC message */
QueryDidDocumentRequest("did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb")

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "verificationMethods" : [
        {
            "id": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
    ]
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z", 
  "versionId": "ae11692325525e82337167fcfab34d45d1904ff786e2d4bf4be2d1c4878cd34c" /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */
}
```

> Note that the representation is not compatible with the JSON-LD standard due to some specificity of the Protobuf message format.

Author: I'll address this in a following commit

###### Update

> There are two ways of updating a DID document:
> 
> - manage DID controllers
> - manipulate verification methods and relationships 
> 
> In both cases the target DID MUST exists on chain and the `signerAccount` MUST exists as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or being listed as a DID controller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two ways of updating a DID document:

- Manage DID controllers
- Manipulate verification methods and relationships 

In both cases, the target DID must exist on-chain and the `signerAccount` must exist as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or be listed as a DID controller.
```

> **DID controllers** 

Reviewer 3: The heading capitalization style is to use Title case, it's handy to use https://capitalizemytitle.com/# 

because we gave two methods above, let's use the same language in the heading

> The DID controllers MAY be set using the gRPC message:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set the DID controllers using the gRPC message:
```

`MsgUpdateDidDocument(did string, controllers []string, signerAccount string)` 

> The parameter `did` identifies the did document, the `controllers` are a list of DIDs that will replace the DID document controllers list and the `signerAccount` is the account address signing the transaction.
> 
> Controllers will be added using the `did:keys` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The parameters are as follows:

 - `did` identifies the did document
 - `controllers` are a list of DIDs that will replace the DID document controllers list 
 - `signerAccount` is the account address that is signing the transaction

Controllers will be added using the `did:keys` method.
```

    ["cosmos195rlq2hjnn2tmagskys4xtsnsey6gjljg8zxrn"],
    "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
)

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "controller": [
        "did:key:cosmos195rlq2hjnn2tmagskys4xtsnsey6gjljg8zxrn"  // <-- new controller added
    ],
    "verificationMethods" : [
        {
            "id": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
    ]
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-04-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "96b3504be7e37a6aa55faff3cd41266bf4db3b0654263e1d9b779d3b30174dd1", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */  //<-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": false
}

```

> **Verification methods and relationships**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Manipulate Verification Methods and Relationships**
```

Reviewer 3: oh sorry I didn't notice until now, wdyt about using Markdown heading hierarchical syntax instead of just bold?
so instead of **Bold Heading** we could use ### Bold Heading (or whatever level you like)

using heading levels is nifty for generating TOCs too, we can limit the levels to show in TOC if TOC length is a concern

Author: I need to review the source again why I didn't use the ### here, but it was on purposes

> A new verification method MAY be added using the gRPC message

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add a new verification method using the gRPC message:
```

```
MsgAddVerification(did string, accountId string, relationships []string, signerAccount string)
```

> The parameter `did` identifies the did document, the `accountId` is the account to be added to the verification method, the `relationships` are the list of relationships that the `accountId` shall be registered into.  The `signerAccount` is the account address signing the transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The parameters are as follows:

 - `did` identifies the did document
 - `accountId` is the account to be added to the verification method
 - `relationships` is the list of relationships that the `accountId` will be registered into
 - `signerAccount` is the account address that is signing the transaction
```

Reviewer 3: for details like these important parameters, it's helpful to use list items

> The list of relationships MUST contains only valid [relationships names](#DID_document)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The list of relationships must contain only valid [relationships names](#DID_document) as defined in the DID document:
```

Reviewer 3: using descriptive link text is helpful per https://developers.google.com/style/link-text 

(oh, so sorry to provide so many granular suggestions! I could talk about style, writing, and language all day long)

            "id": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
        "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"  //<-- new verification method added to authentication relationship
    ],
    "keyAgreement": {
         "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2" //<-- new verification method added to keyAgreement relationship
    }
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-05-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "262495b1159c1cd7faf0da56deb6521bb2980d04435818906e417aae47604027", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": false
}

```

> The relationships of a verification method MAY be set using the gRPC message:

Reviewer 3: again, not sure why we are using MAY capital, we want to use can here

I prefer imperative language as shown here, especially for instructions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set the relationships of a verification method using the gRPC message:
```

```
MsgSetVerificationRelationships(did string, accountId string, relationships []string, signerAccount string)
```

> The list of relationships MUST contains only valid [relationships names](#DID_document)

Reviewer 3: see previous suggestion to provide more context to the link text

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The list of relationships MUST contain only valid [relationships names](#DID_document)
```

            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj"
        },
        { 
            "id": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj#cash1ts9ejqg7k4ht2sm53hycty875362yqxqmt9grj",
        "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"  
    ]
    // <-- keyAgreement has been removed 
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-06-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "9066f968940392f3b36a580737f8e1c0bb4bc5ea6757f4d981cb7252c58710e5", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ //<-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": false
}
```

A verification method MAY be removed using the same gRPC message leaving the `relationships` fields empty. 

> The `signerAccount` MUST exists as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or being listed as a DID controller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `signerAccount` MUST exist as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or being listed as a DID controller.
```

    "controller": [
        "did:key:cosmos195rlq2hjnn2tmagskys4xtsnsey6gjljg8zxrn" 
    ],
    "verificationMethods" : [
        // <-- original verification method removed ==> keys have been rotated
        { 
            "id": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"  
    ]
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-06-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "9066f968940392f3b36a580737f8e1c0bb4bc5ea6757f4d981cb7252c58710e5", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": false
}
```

**Services**

A service MUST be an entity with the following properties:
  
- `id`: a valid RFC3986 URI string. 
- `type`: a non empty string.
- `serviceEndpoint`: a valid RFC3986 URI string.  

> A service MAY be added using the gRPC method:

Reviewer 3: can 
or use imperative language as provided in similar previous edits

```
MsgAddService(did string, service_data Service, signerAccount string)
```

> The `id` of a service MUST be unique within the DID document

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `id` of a service MUST be unique within the DID document.
```

    "controller": [
        "did:key:cosmos195rlq2hjnn2tmagskys4xtsnsey6gjljg8zxrn" 
    ],
    "verificationMethods" : [
        // <-- original verification method removed ==> keys have been rotated
        { 
            "id": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "type": "EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020",
            "controller": "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2",
            "blockchainAccountID": "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
        }
    ],
    "authentication": [
        "did:key:cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2#cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"  
    ],
    "services": []  // <-- the service list is now empty
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-08-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "35ba49b94b20ac0a1805aa5283035ea71b003f56e3aeda6a4e9027779fe4aef5", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": false
}
```

###### Deactivate

A DID can be deactivated using the gRPC message:

```
MsgDeactivateDid(did string, signerAccount string)
```

> The DID identified by the parameter `did` MUST exists on chain and the `signerAccount` MUST exists as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or being listed as a DID controller.
> 
> This operation MUST remove all the verification methods and controllers and set the metadata property `deactivated` to true. This operation is not reversible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The DID identified by the parameter `did` MUST exist on-chain and the `signerAccount` MUST exist as a verification method (property `blockchainAccountID`) in a verification relationship of type `authentication` or being listed as a DID controller.

This operation MUST remove all the verification methods and controllers and set the metadata property `deactivated` to true. This operation is not reversible.
```

Example:

```javascript
/* gRPC message */
MsgAddDeactivateDid(
    "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb", 
    "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
)

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "controller": [], // <-- controllers are removed 
    "verificationMethods" : [] // <-- verification methods are removed
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-09-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "e5ca728b93d19daa54180e20eec76d0d5614656c2ee3509df5a21a3abc1249ea", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": true  // <-- field deactivated set to true
}
```

> ### Method specific properties 
> 
> #### [Verification material](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-material)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Method-specific Properties 

#### [DID-core Verification Material](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-material)
```

Reviewer 3: hmmm best not to use a heading as a link to an external source, suggest incorporating the link into the following text

> The verification material type SHOULD be `EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020`
> 
> The content of the verification material SHOULD be `blockchainAccountID`, but for interoperability reason the verification material should support also `publicKeyHex`. 
> 
> Support for other verification materials MAY be introduced. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The verification material type must be `EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020`.

The content of the verification material can be `blockchainAccountID`, but for interoperability reasons, the verification material should support also `publicKeyHex`. 

Support for other verification materials might be introduced. 
```

> ### [Verification relationships]((https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-relationships))

Reviewer 3: I won't address all heading suggested edits, see line 597

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Verification Relationships
```

The DID document MUST support the following verification relationships:

- [`authentication`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#authentication) - authorizes amends to the DID document
- [`assertionMethod`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#assertion)
- [`keyAgreement`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#key-agreement)
- [`capabilityInvocation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-invocation)
- [`capabilityDelegation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-delegation)

##### [DID Document Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-document-metadata)

The implementation for metadata MUST report the following properties for a DID document

> - `created`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the creation date, that is the utc date associated to the block height when the DID document was submitted the first time
> - `updated`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the last update date, that is the utc date associated to the block height when the DID document was submitted the last time
> - `deactivated`: a boolean field that indicates whenever the DID document is [deactivated](#Deactivate) 
> - `versionId`: for the version id we use the hex encoded blake2b hash of the transaction that created/updated the DID

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `created`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the creation date that is the UTC date associated with the block height when the DID document was submitted the first time
- `updated`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the last update date that is the UTC date associated with the block height when the DID document was submitted the last time
- `deactivated`: a boolean field that indicates if the DID document is [deactivated](#Deactivate) 
- `versionId`: a hex-encoded BLAKE2b hash of the transaction that created or updated the DID
```

##### [DID Resolution Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-resolution-metadata)

> The resolution metadata are outside the scope of the gRPC interface and are not covered in this ADR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resolution metadata are outside the scope of the gRPC interface and are not covered in this ADR.
```

#### [DID URL Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-url-syntax)

> The DID URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and are not covered in this ADR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The DID URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.
```

##### [Query parameters](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-parameters)

> The query parameters URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and are not covered in this ADR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The query parameters URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.
```

<!-- 

The implementation MUST support the following query parameters:

- `versionId` - to retrieve a DID document with a specific version 
- `versionTime` - to retrieve the version of the DID document valid at a specific time, the parameter MUST be a valid [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime).   

The format for the queries is:
-->
## Consequences

> The cosmos ecosystem will have at its disposition a DID module compatible with the W3C standard and with a high chance of compatibility with 3rd party components such as cloud and edge agents, resolvers and so on.
> 
> ### Backwards Compatibility
> 
> This is a new module so backward compatibility is not a concern.
> 
> ### Positive
> 
> - The implementation of the ADR provides the foundation for interoperability with the DID standard and more in general with SSI identity approach
> - Closely following the W3C standard gives the best chances of successful interoperability with 3rd party components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Cosmos ecosystem will provide a DID module that is compatible with the W3C standard and offers a high chance of compatibility with third-party components such as cloud and edge agents, resolvers, and so on.

### Backwards Compatibility

This is a new module so backward compatibility is not a concern.

### Positive

- The implementation of the ADR provides the foundation for interoperability with the DID standard and the SSI identity approach.
- Closely following the W3C standard gives the best chances of successful interoperability with third-party components.
```

### Negative

> - The implementation follows rigidly the W3C specification leaving little room for extensibility, that might became an issue for a wider adoption 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The implementation rigidly follows the W3C specification which leaves little room for extensibility. This approach might become an issue for wider adoption.
```

### Neutral

N/A

## Further Discussions

While an ADR is in the DRAFT or PROPOSED stage, this section contains a summary of issues to be solved in future iterations. The issues summarized here can reference comments from a pull request discussion.
Later, this section can optionally list ideas or improvements the author or reviewers found during the analysis of this ADR.

> - The `did:key` method specifies a key format that is not the one used in this ADR. The ADR needs to be amended or to follow a different approach
> - The approach proposed is somewhat locked in to the current implementation, it will have to be revised in successive iterations. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `did:key` method specifies a key format that is different from the one used in this ADR. This ADR needs to be amended or follow a different approach.
- The approach proposed is somewhat locked into the current implementation and will have to be revised in successive iterations. 
```

Reviewer 3: hmmm which `did:key` method are we talking about in line 673? if we mean the `did:key` method  in the Cosmos SDK, let's say that.

This operation MUST remove all the verification methods and controllers and set the metadata property `deactivated` to true. This operation is not reversible.

Example:

```javascript
/* gRPC message */
MsgAddDeactivateDid(
    "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb", 
    "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
)

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "controller": [], // <-- controllers are removed 
    "verificationMethods" : [] // <-- verification methods are removed
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-09-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "e5ca728b93d19daa54180e20eec76d0d5614656c2ee3509df5a21a3abc1249ea", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": true  // <-- field deactivated set to true
}
```

### Method-specific Properties 

> #### [DID-core Verification Material](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-material)
> 
> The verification material type must be `EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### DID-core Verification Material

The [Verification Material](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-material) type must be `EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020`.
```

The content of the verification material can be `blockchainAccountID`, but for interoperability reasons, the verification material should support also `publicKeyHex`. 

Support for other verification materials might be introduced. 

### [Verification relationships]((https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-relationships))

> The DID document MUST support the following verification relationships:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The DID document MUST support the following [verification relationships](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-relationships):
```

- [`authentication`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#authentication) - authorizes amends to the DID document
- [`assertionMethod`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#assertion)
- [`keyAgreement`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#key-agreement)
- [`capabilityInvocation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-invocation)
- [`capabilityDelegation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-delegation)

> ##### [DID Document Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-document-metadata)
> 
> The implementation for metadata MUST report the following properties for a DID document

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### DID Document Metadata

The implementation for [DID document metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-document-metadata) MUST report the following properties for a DID document:
```

- `created`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the creation date that is the UTC date associated with the block height when the DID document was submitted the first time
- `updated`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the last update date that is the UTC date associated with the block height when the DID document was submitted the last time
- `deactivated`: a boolean field that indicates if the DID document is [deactivated](#Deactivate) 
- `versionId`: a hex-encoded BLAKE2b hash of the transaction that created or updated the DID

> ##### [DID Resolution Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-resolution-metadata)
> 
> The resolution metadata are outside the scope of the gRPC interface and are not covered in this ADR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
##### DID Resolution Metadata

The [DID Resolution Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-resolution-metadata) is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.
```

> #### [DID URL Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-url-syntax)
> 
> The DID URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.
> ##### [Query parameters](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-parameters)
> 
> The query parameters URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### DID URL Syntax

The [DID URL Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-url-syntax) is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.

##### DID Query Parameters

The [DID Query parameters](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-parameters) URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.
```

# ADR 4: DID

## Changelog

- 2021-08-02: Initial draft

## Status

DRAFT
## Abstract

[Decentralized identifiers](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core) (DIDs) are a type of identifier that enables verifiable, decentralized digital identity. A DID refers to any subject (for example, a person, organization, thing, data model, abstract entity, and so on) as determined by the controller of the DID.

This document specifies the DID method for a Cosmos SDK-based implementation of the W3C recommendation, its properties, operations, and an explanation of the process to resolve DIDs to the resources that they represent. 

## Context

> The aim of the Cosmos Cash project is to provide a state-of-the-art collateralized stable coin implementation that is compliant with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aim of the Cosmos Cash project is to provide a state-of-the-art platform for the hosting of collateralized stable coins that is compliant with:
```

 - EU regulations such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA)
 - International recommendations such as the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) "Travel Rule"
 - Local anti-money laundering (AML) regulations

> The Cosmos Cash state-of-the-art collateralized stable coin implementation includes:
> 
> - A public financial infrastructure (public goods) 
> - Auditing and identification of bad actors (AML regulations)
> - A strict privacy-respecting approach (GDPR)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cosmos Cash platform is based on the following principles:

- Open financial infrastructure is a public good
- Money laundering prevention also benefits society
- Users should benefit from a strict privacy-respecting approach (GDPR)
```

This operation MUST remove all the verification methods and controllers and set the metadata property `deactivated` to true. This operation is not reversible.

Example:

```javascript
/* gRPC message */
MsgAddDeactivateDid(
    "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb", 
    "cash1n90e4s33ljxn00lhucvnmnfjng773efma38dc2"
)

/* DID document */
{
    "context": [
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1"
    ],
    "id": "did:cosmos:cash:806e557e-ecdb-4e80-ab0d-a82ad35c9ceb",
    "controller": [], // <-- controllers are removed 
    "verificationMethods" : [] // <-- verification methods are removed
}

/* DID metadata */
{
  "created": "2021-03-23T06:35:22Z",
  "updated": "2021-09-23T06:35:22Z",  // <--  update field modified
  "versionId": "e5ca728b93d19daa54180e20eec76d0d5614656c2ee3509df5a21a3abc1249ea", /* hex(blake2b(tx)) */ // <-- new hash computed
  "deactivated": true  // <-- field deactivated set to true
}
```

### Method-specific Properties 

#### DID-core Verification Material

The [Verification Material](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-material) type must be `EcdsaSecp256k1RecoveryMethod2020`.

> The content of the verification material can be `blockchainAccountID`, but for interoperability reasons, the verification material should support also `publicKeyHex`. 

Reviewer: It may be stating the obvious, but would this benefit by stating what the reasons are? I think one reason for illustrative purposes would be ok

Support for other verification materials might be introduced. 

### Verification Relationships

The DID document MUST support the following [verification relationships](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#verification-relationships):

- [`authentication`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#authentication) - authorizes amends to the DID document
- [`assertionMethod`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#assertion)
- [`keyAgreement`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#key-agreement)
- [`capabilityInvocation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-invocation)
- [`capabilityDelegation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#capability-delegation)

##### DID Document Metadata

The implementation for [DID document metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-document-metadata) MUST report the following properties for a DID document:

> - `created`: a [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime) string of the creation date that is the UTC date associated with the block height when the DID document was submitted the first time

Reviewer: Would this benefit by stating the string format? e.g. [RFC3339](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339)

- `deactivated`: a boolean field that indicates if the DID document is [deactivated](#Deactivate) 
- `versionId`: a hex-encoded BLAKE2b hash of the transaction that created or updated the DID

##### DID Resolution Metadata

The [DID Resolution Metadata](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-resolution-metadata) is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.

#### DID URL Syntax

The [DID URL Syntax](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-url-syntax) is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.

##### DID Query Parameters

The [DID Query parameters](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#did-parameters) URL is outside the scope of the gRPC interface and is not covered in this ADR.

<!-- 

The implementation MUST support the following query parameters:

- `versionId` - to retrieve a DID document with a specific version 
- `versionTime` - to retrieve the version of the DID document valid at a specific time, the parameter MUST be a valid [datetime](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-2/#dateTime).   

The format for the queries is:
-->
## Consequences

> The Cosmos ecosystem will provide a DID module that is compatible with the W3C standard and offers a high chance of compatibility with third-party components such as cloud and edge agents, resolvers, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cosmos ecosystem WILL HAVE a DID module that is compatible with the W3C standard and offers a high chance of compatibility with third-party components such as cloud and edge agents, resolvers, and so on.
```
